[Music]
exercise releases a whole range of
chemicals
into our blood and they can give you
this feeling of
quite elated almost the runner's high if
you like but what we're fundamentally
interested in is
getting more blood and more fuel to the
brain and exercise helps us do that
damien's latest research focuses on the
best way to exercise to get maximum
blood flow to different parts of the
brain
today he's putting me through two
different tests on the exercise bike
and one of them will work my brain just
as hard as my body
first damien's going to measure the
blood flow to my brain when i'm doing
some standard exercise
as i cycle damien and his team can see
which parts of my brain receive the most
blood
but it's the next part of the experiment
damien is really interested in
a test i've been warned is a little
strange so now what we're going to do is
we're going to repeat that but this time
when we're exercising we're going to
have you looking at the flashing
checkerboard
this looks fun but why are we doing it
the brain is working super hard to try
to make sense
of all of the changing shapes for this
test
damien's getting me to stare at the
board for 30 seconds
then shut my eyes for 30 seconds 3
2 1 eyes closed this time i'm working my
brain at the same time as exercising
damien's team are all the time measuring
how much blood flows into my brain
and where it goes once it gets there
this is flow velocity so red blood cells
whizzing into your brain so they're
whizzing into the front of the brain
the middle cerebral artery and to the
back of the brain
the posterior cerebral artery at rest
you can see
there's less flow moving into the back
of the brain
perfectly normal worry then thanks
perfectly normal that's good to know and
then when you exercise
you've got a whopping great 63 increase
to the back of the brain that's huge so
this is a really important
feature in as much as we know that the
back of the brain certainly in some of
these
mental health disorders particularly
prone to impairment
so with exercise here as you can see
we're
selectively targeting the back of that
brain
so during standard exercise the blood
flow to the back of my brain increased
by
63 percent increasing blood flow in in
particular to the back part of the brain
helps maintain good mental health
because it carries with it
nourishment in the form of oxygen
glucose and proteins
which help grow and repair brain tissue
next
what difference did the flashing squares
make i want to know what was going on
when i was opening and closing my eyes
tell me about my brain then you didn't
feel as if you're doing any extra work
but the brain was working jolly hard so
you've got a six percent
increase in flow to the front part of
the brain
but you've got a whopping great 29
percent increase
just by looking at the checkerboard to
the back part of the brain
with that additional visual
stimulization superimposed on the
exercise
exercising at the same time as
performing a mental task
results in more blood flow to the back
of the brain
which can help alleviate symptoms of
depression panic disorders and anxiety
in the long term
it's thought that this hard-to-reach
area contains some of the parts of the
brain
which are fundamental to mood so any
additional
stimulation of the brain translates into
good news for the brain in terms of
supercharging turbo boosting extra blood
into the brain so
dancing rock climbing listening to a
podcast
you know all of these that challenge the
brain in addition to the exercise
is good news for the brain so any
activity where you have to concentrate
at the same time as exercising
is a great way to boost your mood it can
be as easy as listening to a podcast
when you go for a walk or a run